...s Asia that.
Uh.
I'm going to talk today about.
Energy and climate.
And that might seem a bit surprising, because my full time work of the foundation is mostly about vaccines and seeds about the things that we need to invent and deliver.
To help the poorest two billion live better lives.
But energy and climate are extremely important to these people, in fact, more important than to anyone else on the planet the climate getting worse.
Means that many years their crops won't grohl they'll be too much rain not enough, rain things will change in ways that their fragile environment simply can't support.
And that leads to starvation leads done certainty at Leeds unrest.
As for the climate changes will be terrible for them.
Also the price of energy is very important to them. In fact, if you could pick just one thing the lower the price up to reduce poverty by fire, you would pick energy.
Now the price of energy has come down over time.
Really advanced civilization.
I was based on advances in in energy, the coal revolution dueled the industrial revolution, and even in the 1900s we've seen a very rapid decline in the price of electricity.
And that's why we have refrigerator air conditioning we can make modern materials and do so many things.
And so we're in a wonderful situation with l precisely in the rich world.
But as we make a cheaper and love tailored to go for making a de twice as t.
We need to mean the new constraint.
And that constraint has to do with c 02 seal too.
Is warming the planet and the equation on c 02 is actually a very straightforward one. If you sum up the c 02 that gets emitted.
That leads to a temperature increase and that temperature increase leads to some very negative effects.
The effects on the weather perhaps worse the indirect effects in that the natural legal systems can't adjust to these rapid changes, and so you get ecosystem collapses.
Now the exact amount of how you map from a certain increase in of c 02 to what temperature will be in where the positive feedbacks are there is some uncertainty there, but not very much.
And there are certainly uncertainty about how bad those effects will be, but they will be extremely bad.
I asked the top scientists on the several times do we really have to get down to near zero can't we just cut it in half or a quarter and the answer is that until we get near to zero.
The temperature will continue to rise until that's that's. A big challenge is very different than seen. You know were 12 foot high truck trying to get under a 10 foot bridge, and we can just sort of.
Squeeze under this is something that has to get to zero.
Now we put out a lot of carbon dioxide every year now over 26 billion tons on for each American it's about 20 tons.
Our for people in poor countries have Less on one time to now raging about five times for everyone on the planet, and somehow we have to make changes.
That will bring that down to zero.
It's been constantly going up it's only various economic changes that have even flattened at all, so we have to go from rapidly rising to follow him and falling all the way to zero.
This equation has four packers a little bit of mortification so got it thing on the left c 02 that we want to get to zero and that's going to be based on the number of people.
The services each person using unite average.
The energy on average free service and the c 02 being put out.
Our per unit of energy so let's look at each one of these and see how we can get this down to zero. Probably one of these numbers is going to have to get pretty near to zero.
How's that.
Back from high school algebra, but let's let's take a look.
Firstly, got population of the world today has 6.8 billion people that headed up to about nine billion.
Now, if we do a really great job on new vaccines healthcare reproductive health services, we could lower that by perhaps 10 or 15%, but there we see an increase of about 1.3.
The second factor is the services we use this encompasses everything the food we clothing't v heating. These are very good things.
Uh getting rid of poverty means providing these services to almost everyone on the planet in a to greet thing for this number to go up in the rich world. Perhaps the top one billion, we probably could cut back and use Less.
But every year this number on average just waiting to go up.
And so overall, that will more than double the services delivered per person.
Here we have a very basic service. Do you have lighting in your house to be able to read your homework and, in fact, these kids don't to they're going out and reading their schoolwork under the street laughs.
Now efficiency. E. The energy for each service here. Finally, we have some good news, we have something that's not going up.
Through various inventions and new ways of doing lighting through different types of cars.
Are different ways, the building buildings. There are a lot of services where you can bring the energy for that service down quite substantially some individual services even bring it down by 9%.
There are other services like how we make for lies or how we do air transport where the rooms for improvement are far far Less.
And so overall here if we're optimistic we may get a reduction of a factor of three to even perhaps a factor of s**.
But police for three factors now we've gone from 26 billion to at best maybe 13 billion tons and that just won't cut it.
So we are told that this 4th factor there's going to be a key one and this is the amount of c 02 put out for each unit of energy. And so the question is can you actually get back to zero.
If you burn coal, no few burn natural Gas in almost every way we make electricity today, except for the emerging renewables and nuclear puts out c 02.
And so we're going to have to do at a global scale.
Is create a new system until we need energy miracles.
Now, when I use the term miracle, I don't mean something that's impossible.
You know, they the microprocessor as a miracle, the personal computers, a miracle, the inner net, net services, or a miracle, so the people here participated in the creation of many miracles.
Usually, we don't have a deadline where you have to get the miracle by a certain date, usually just kind of stand by and some kind along some don't. This is a case.
Where we actually have to drive at full speed and get a miracle in a a pretty tight timeline.
Now I thought how could I really capture this? Is there some kind of napper little in some demonstration that would grab people's imagination here.
I thought back to a year ago, when I brought mosquitoes.
And somehow at people enjoyed that it really got them involved in the idea? You know, there are people liberal mosquitoes so with energy.
I like could come up with is this I decided that releasing fireflies would be my contribution to the environment could have this year so here we ever.
Something after firefighters and pulled the non bite in fact in might even not even leave that jar laughter.
Now there's all sorts of gimmicky solutions like that one, but they don't really add up to much we need.
Solutions either one or several that have.
Unbelievable scale and unbelievable reliability.
And, although there as many directions or people seeking.
I really only see five that can achieve the big numbers have left out type deal thermal fusion by appeals. Those may make some contribution in a vacant knew better than I expect so much the better.
But my key point here.
His book with warning, we have to work on each of these five and we can't give up any of them, because they they look daunting because they all have significant challenges.
I'll let's look first, at their burning, fossil fuels see they're, burning, coal and burning natural Gas.
What you need to do there, yeah, seems like it might be simple but it's not and that's for't all of the c 02. After you burn it going out the flu pressurise it cradle liquid put it somewhere and hope it stays there.
Now, we have some pilot things that do this at the 60 to 80% level, but getting up to that four percentage that will be very tricky and a green on where these CO. Two quantity should be put.
Will be hired, but Dr. first one here is this long term issue who's going to be sure who's going to guarantee.
As something that is literally billions of times larger than any paper of waste do think I've been in terms of nuclear other things. This is a lot.
A volume.
So that's a tough one.
Next would be nuclear.
It also has three big problems highest, particularly in highly regulated countries is high the issue of the safety really dealing good about nothing can go wrong that he'd been out you have these human operators.
That the fuel doesn't get used for weapons.
And then we're what do you do with the waste, although it's not very large other a lot of concerns about that people need to feel good about it so three very tough problems that might be a solvable and so should be worked on.
The white house three of the five I grouped together. These are what people often referred to as the renewable sources.
And they actually all loads rate date on quail fuel they have some disadvantages. One is that the density.
And the energy gather in these technologies is dramatically Less than a power plant. This is energy farming so you're talking about many square Miles thousands of times more area, then they new think others are normal energy plant.
Of these are interment and sources, the sun doesn't shine.
All day doesn't shine every day and likewise the wind doesn't blow all the time and so have you depend on the sources. You have to have some way of getting energy dream those time periods.
That is not available.
So we have got big cast challenges here.
We have transmission challenges, for example, say this energy sources outside your country, not only need d technology, but you have to deal with the risk of the energy coming from elsewhere. And finally, this storage problem.
Ended the marginalized this I went through and looked at all the types of batteries that get made for choirs for computers for farms for flashlights for everything.
And compare that to the amount of a look more energy the world users and what I found is that all the batteries we make now.
Fed store Less than 10 minutes of all the energy.
Until then per hour, we need a big breakthrough here something that's going to be our packer of 100 better than the approaches. We have now it's not it's not impossible, but it's not a very easy thing.
Now this shows up when you try to get the the Internet and soars to be a bob say 20 to 30% of what you're using if you're counting on it for 100% you need a an incredible.
Miracle battery.
Now how we're going to go forward on this what's what's the right approach is that the Manhattan project quotes the the thing that can get us there, while we need lots of companies are working on this.
Hundreds in each of these by powers, we need at least 100 people and a lot of them you'll look at and say they're crazy that's good.
N I think here in the ted group, we have many people who are already pursuing this bill Gross has several companies include one called. E. Solar. That has great solar thermal technology.
An old Paul invest investing in dozens of companies that are doing greetings and have interesting possibilities and am trying to help back that.
I need the miracle than I actually are backing a company that perhaps surprisingly is actually taking the nuclear product.
And there are some innovations in nuclear modular liquid and innovation really stopped in this industry, quite some time and goes to the idea that there is some good ideas laying around is not all that surprising.
The idea of terror power.
Is that, instead of burning third part of uranium, the 1% that's that you 2 35, we decided well, let's burn the 99% the u 2. 3. 8.
It's kind of a crazy idea and back people had talked about it for a long time.
But they could never simulate properly whether it would work or not until it's through the advent of modern supercomputers that now you can simulate and see that yes with the right materials approach. This looks like it would work.
N because you're burning that 99%.
You have greatly improved cast up profile, you actually burn up the waste and you can actually use as fuel.
All the leftover waste from today's reactors and so instead of worrying about them you just take that it's a great thing.
It breeds this uranium as it goes along so it's kind of like the candle in suits it's, a log there are often referred to as the traveling wave reactor.
In terms of fuel.
This really solves the problem. I have got a picture here have a place in Kentucky. This is the left over of the 99% where they've taken out the party bernau now so have called depleted uranium that would power the us for hundreds of years.
And simply by filtering seawater in an inexpensive process, you don't have enough fuel for the entire lifetime of the rest of the planet.
So, you know, it's got lots lots of challenges ahead, but it is an example of the many hundreds and hundreds of ideas that we need to move forward.
So we're turning couch we measure ourselves what should our report card our work like.
Well let's go out to where we really need to get in, and then looked at the intermediate for 2050 you've heard many people talk about this 80% reduction.
That really is very important that we get there and that 20% will be used up by things going on in poor countries still some agriculture. Hopefully, we will have cleaned up forests, free cement.
So to get to that 80%.
The developed countries.
Including countries like China will have had the switch their electronic electricity generation all together.
So the other great is are we deploying this zero emission technology.
Have we deployed in all the developed countries and we're in the process of getting that elsewhere, that's super important at a key element of making.
That report card.
So backing up from there lectured the 2020 report card look like.
Well it again, it should have the two elements we should go through these efficiency measures to start getting reductions. The Less we emit the last that some will be of c 02 and therefore the last the temperature but in some ways the grade we get there.
Doing things that don't get us all the way to the big redactions is only equally or maybe even slightly Less important than the other.
Which is the piece of innovation on these breakthroughs these breakthroughs we need to move those at full speed and we can measure that in terms of companies pilot projects, regulatory things that have been chain.
There's a lot of great books that have been written about this the al gore book our choice and the David mci book, sustainable energy without the hot air they really go through it, and I think can great a framework.
That this can be discussed broadly because we need Brian backing for this.
There was a lot has to come together. So this is a wish it's a very concrete wish that we invent this technology. If you gave me only one wish for the next 50 years, I can pickles president.
I can pick the vaccine, which was something I love, or a could pick that this thing that's half the class with knoll c 02 gifts invented.
This is the wish I would pick.
This is the one with the greatest impact.
If we don't get this wish that division between the people who think short term and long term will be terrible between the us and China between poor countries that rich, and most of all the lives of those two billion will be far worse.
So what do we have to do? What am I appealing to you too, as step forward and.
And drive we need to go from war research funding.
One countries get gather at places like Copenhagen leishan just discuss the c 02 they should discuss this innovation agenda and you'd be stand up the ridiculously low levels of spending on these innovative approaches.
We do need the market and sadness c 02 tax cap and trade, something that gets out price signal out there we need to get the message out we need to have this style of be a more rational more understandable dialogue, including the steps of the government takes.
This is unimportant wish, but it is one I think we can achieve.
Thank you.
....
Uh you ....
Um.
Thank you um stutter and the far more about about the terror paler right first of will give a sense what to the scale of investment. That is.
Well do.
He actually do this software by the supercomputer higher all the great scientists which we done that's only 10s of millions and even once we test our materials out in a rush from reactor to make sure that our materials work.
Properly, then you'll only be up and hundreds of millions, the touching is building the pilot reactor finding the several billion finding the regulator that location that will actually build the first one of these once you get the first one built.
If it works as advertised then it as clear as day, because the economics, the energy density are so different than nuclear, as we know, it and said to understand it right this involves.
Building deep into the ground on the slack like a vertical kind of column of nuclear.
The all of the fittest of spent uranium.
And then and then and then the process starts at the top and kind of works down that's reg to d'you're always refueling react sea of of people in large controls that can go wrong thing. We are all it up and moving things in and out that.
That's, not good so if you have very very cheap fuel, then you can put 60 years in just think of it as a log.
Put it down and not have those same complexities, and it just sits there and burns to the 60 years.
R n and then it's start it's it's a nuclear power plant is zone waste disposal solution. Yeah, well, what happens with the week you can.
You can let it sit there there's a lot Less waste under this approach.
Then you can actually peak that and put it into another one and berm that.
And we started out actually by taking the waste that exists today that sitting in these cooling pools are dried casting by reactors that's our fuel to begin with. So the thing that's been a problem from those reactors is actually.
But gets that into ours and your reducing the volume of the waste quite dramatically as you're going through this process.
I mean you're talking to different people around the world about the possibilities here, whereas there most interesting actually doing something with this.
Well, we haven't picked a particular place but.
And there's all these interesting disclosure rules about anything it's called nuclear. So we've got a lot of interest of the people. From the company have been rushing India, China, I've been back seen the secretary of energy.
... are talking about how this.
Fits end of the energy agenda, so I'm optimistic, the French and Japanese have done some work. This is a variant on something that has been done it's an important.
Advanced, but it's like a fast reactor in a lot of countries have built on. So anybody who's done fast reactor is a candidate to to be where the first one gets built. So in in your mind um.
Timescale unlikelihood of actually taking certain like this slide.
What we mean.
For one of these high scale electorate elect generation things that's very cheap.
We have 20 years to invent and then 20 years to deploy that's sort of the deadline that the buyer models, environmental models of have shown us that we have to meet.
And terror power if things go well, which is wishing for a lot could easily meet that.
And there are fortunately now dozens of companies we need to be hundreds who likewise, if their science goes well with the funding for their plant, pilot plans goes well that they they can compete for this.
And it's best at multiple succeed, because then you could use a mix.
A mix of these things we certainly need one to succeed.
Then in terms of big scale possible game changes. This is the biggest that your aware about there.
And energy breakthrough is the the most important thing it would have been even without the environmental constraints of the environmental comes straight just makes it so much so much Greater in the nuclear space. There are other innovators.
Are we don't know their work as well as we know this one, but the modular people that's a different approach there's a liquid type reactor, which seems a little hard.
But maybe they say about us in so there there are different 1s, but the beauty of this is a molecule uranium has a million times as much energy.
As a molecule of say call.
And so if you can deal with the negatives which essentially the relation the footprint in class the potential in terms of effect on land and various things is.
In almost any class at the song.
If this doesn't work.
Then what do we have to start taking emergency measures to try and keep the temperature of the earth stable yeah, if you get into that situation it's like.
If you're, he been overeating in you're about to have a heart attack. You know, then then then where do you go? You may need heart, surgery or something there is a line of research on what's called geo engineering.
Which are various techniques that would delay the heating.
Tobias 20 or 30 years to get our act together. Now you hope that's just an insurance policy. You hope you don't need to do that.
Some people say you shouldn't even work on the insurance policy because it might make you lazy that you'll keep eating because you know heart surgery will be there to save you I'm not sure that's wise given the importance of the problem but.
There's now that the geo engineering discussion about should that be in the back pocket.
In case, things happen thousand or this innovation goes a lot slower than we expect.
Climate skeptics if you had them a sentence for two to say to them, how how might you persuade them that they're wrong.
Well, unfortunately, the skeptics come in different camps, I mean the 1s who.
Make scientific arguments are very few. You know, are they saying that there's negative feedback effects have to do a clouds that off sat things they're beery very few things.
That they can even say, you know there's a chance at a million of those things.
The main problem you have here it's kind of like aes, you make them a state now, and you pay for it a lot later.
And so when you have all sorts of urgent problems the idea of taking paying now that has to do the gain later in a somewhat uncertain painting. In fact, the IPC c report, you know that.
That not necessarily the worst keys, and there are people in the ritual to look at IPC c and say okay. You know that that isn't that big a deal. The fact is it's that uncertain part.
That should move us toward says, but my dreams year is that if you can make it economic.
And me the CO two constraint, then the skeptics say okay, I don't care that it doesn't put out here too. I kind of wish did without here too, but I guess I'll accept it because it's cheaper that right what's come before.
And so.
And so that would be a response to the bjorn lomborg argument that basically a few if you spend all this energy trying to sell the c 02 problem.
It's going to take away all your other goals, trying to rid the world of poverty and malaria and therefore that it's a stupid waste of the earth's resources to put money towards that, when they're better things we can do yet more the actual spending, non the r and ds.
You know say the us and spend 10 billion year more than it is right now it's not that dramatic it shouldn't take away from other things. The thing you get into big money on, and this reasonable people can disagree is when you have some its noneconomic.
And you're trying to fund that that to me mostly his waste unless you're very close and you're just funding the learning curve and it's going to get very cheap.
I believe we should tray more things that have the potential to be far Less expensive. If the trade off you get into his let's make energy suprun super expensive.
Then the rich can afford that mean all of us here could pay five times as much for energy and not change our lifestyle. The disaster is for that two billion and even lomborg cows changed his stick now is.
Why isn't the r and d getting more discussed he he still because it is earlier stuff sort of associated with the skeptic camp but.
He is realized that that's a pretty lonely cap, and and so he's making the r and d point and solar is the threat of something that.
I think is appropriate the r and d'peace it's crazy how little it fund.
While built, I suspect I speak on behalf of most people here to say, I really hope your wish comes true. Thank you so much. Thank you.....
Uh.
Uh ....
The just change have the race day one as and on the change that some to ted that it had the ....
Using find solutions the ....
....
The what.
The is thats.
The ring.
The people are playing with words and it's true all week long people have.
Putting words together and very unique ways I've been thinking about how food and wine are bared by experts really understand the flavors in here at ted people are putting ....
Words, together in my hairs, because they understand the ....
Meaning reckless creativity. What I married that is just thinking about words that don't go together we're one one equal three if that's what ted's all about isn't as.
Putting things together we don't normally.